# Psammite Virtual Machine
## A simple 64-bit VM written in C.
Psammite is currently a work in progress. Check the **[Developer Log](DEVLOG.md)**

## How to Build and Run
Psammite uses CMake for its build system.

### Basic setup
#### VM
Generate the build files:
```
cmake -S . -B build
```

Compile the VM:
```
cmake --build build
```


Run the VM:

Linux/MacOS: `./run.sh`

Windows: `.\build\Debug\psammite_vm.exe` if using MSVC, otherwise `.\build\psammite_vm.exe`

#### Sandbox

To code in the sandbox first copy the **[template](sandbox/psammite_sandbox_template.c)** into a file in the same folder called `psammite_sandbox.c`. Write your program where indicated in the file. Then run:
```
cmake -S . -B build -DCOMPILE_SANDBOX=true
cmake --build build
```
##### If using MSVC:
```
.\build\Debug\psammite_sandbox.exe
```
##### If using GCC/Clang:
* Windows
```
.\build\psammite_sandbox.exe
```
* MacOS/Linux
```
./build/psammite_sandbox
```

### Advanced

#### Single-config (Makefiles/Ninja):

Pass the `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` flag during the generation step to change the build profile. Valid options are `Debug`, `Release`, `RelWithDebInfo`, or `MinSizeRel`.

Example:
```
cmake -S . -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
cmake --build build
./run.sh
```

#### Multi-config (MSVC):

The `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` variable is ignored by the generator, as all configurations are generated by default. Use `cmake -S . -B build` to generate the project files.
Select the profile during the actual build step using the `--config` flag. The executable will be generated at `.\build\[Build Profile]\psammite_vm.exe`.

Example:
```
cmake -S . -B build
cmake --build build --config Release
.\build\Release\psammite_vm.exe
```

### Supported Compilers

Only Clang, GCC, and MSVC are supported when compiling the project due to the use of compiler intrinsics to allow portability to big endian host architectures.

## Specification
* Architecture: 64-bit word size, little endian.
* Instruction width: fixed 32-bit instructions.
* Memory: 64 KB, byte-addressable.
* Stack: full-descending (grows downwards, points to the last element).
* ABI rule: Each function (Callee) must  restore the Link Register and Base Pointer of their caller.
* Program counter: single 64-bit register (PC). PC-relative offsets are calculated from the next instruction (PC + 4).
* Integer registers (32x64-bit):
  * R0/ZR is hardwired to 0.
  * R1/SP: Stack Pointer.
  * R2/BP: Base Pointer (anchors the stack frame for local variables).
  * R3/LR: Link Register (holds the return address).
  * R4-R31: general purpose registers.
* Floating-point registers: 32x64-bit registers (FR0-FR31).


### Instruction Set Architecture
TODO
